During the last ten years the members of the interdisciplinary North Atlantic Triangle commission
have explored the close transatlantic links between Europeans and North Americans and the exchange
of people and ideas in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries. They have in particular documented the
networks established especially in the years between the two World Wars, and have underlined the
importance of these relationships for the refugees from Nazi Germany, including Austria after the
Anschluss, who sought a safe haven in the USA.

The database established by the commission shows the ties of friendship between many American
foreign correspondents simultaneously stationed in Vienna and visiting writers as well as numerous
physicians attending courses arranged by the American Medical Association in Vienna, on the one
hand, and members of the Austrian social and cultural elite, on the other. The database demonstrates
the fact that the proximity of their residences in Vienna facilitated contacts and interaction, as
is visualized with the help of the Geographic Information System. Later these networks facilitated
the search for safety in North America, where the refugees needed affidavits supplied by their
American friends to find support and employment. This happened especially close to the Atlantic and
the Pacific coasts and particularly in some academic fields, and in the realms of music and the
theater.

Search in the database will permit interested users to identify key agents in the transatlantic
cultural exchange, especially between the 1920s and 1960s, and to trace their careers. It will allow
users to recognize the role of encounters for scores of individuals in Central Europe and in the USA
and Canada, whose autobiographies and correspondence reflect these ties. It will also enable users
to assess the impact of transatlantic interaction on the genesis of non-fictional and fictional
texts, on plays and musical compositions, and on the evolution of (shared) philosophical and
political ideas. It will also help to identify the consequences of these exchanges for the
perception of the societies on the other side of the Atlantic, and for the development of various
institutions. The database will also illustrate the fortunes and activities of the (relatively few)
returnees among the emigrants, and show the effect and significance of the exchanges across the
North Atlantic, all so far documented in the ten volumes published by the commission since 2012.The
database will aid the users in their attempts to comprehend the historical shifts in the
relationship between the countries of Europe and North America.
